You missed your train! It's hard to believe and funny at the same time, particularly in Germany. We obsess about these kinds of efficient human behaviours, about transit times and how not to spend more than a few moments waiting for a train or Straßenbahn. I even gave you a watch, largely because I like their beauty in superfluity, but also so you don't miss trains! Anyway, there is another train in 2 hours and soon you are off into the strange industrial beauty of the German countryside.

But I know that your watch has a personality of its own and will from time to time (haha...) boycott the telling of hours and minutes to express something more profound than time.

Having said that I wonder is time profound? We talk about it as if it is. We grasp the universe in terms of time (and space). We worry about how much "time" we have. How long will something take. I was thinking about this at the Melbourne Triennial. [more here...!] Pop artists somewhat pretentiously in my view reference their works to time and space, as if the profoundness of these two will lend gravity and importance to the work of art. And yet, so many pieces of modern art remain superficial, lightweight, mere spectacle. In short, rather than being profound they remain empty.

I am starting to think that time and space are not profound, despite the pseudo-philosophical reference to them in popular culture. In fact, they are exactly what Immanuel Kant regarded them as: empty forms. And this points to something which is really profound about our modern culture and experience... that it, too, is empty.

I think this is the reason that you are so moved by John O'Donohue, and that both you (and your watch) sense something about life which is not empty. Your beautiful and painful reflections whilst on the train about how "dull and mediocre most people's lives are, how cut off from what is actually important [they are], and how much [you] ... had started down a similar path." You describe directly what O'Donohue is concerned with, that life simply cannot be filled with empty forms no matter what they might be: our lives dominated by time, or the rhythm of the factory, which is the same thing. Was it not Marx who observed almost two centuries ago that the rhythm of the economy and thus human labour (real human activity) are ultimately reduced to (empty) time. And let's not pretend that because I freely choose to work from home performing some kind of digital act that I escape "the factory" which defines our lives more than ever, from top to bottom. We are never really far from Blake's "Satanic Mills".

Your words describe a kind of antidote to this, or if not, then a view beyond the crushing grey emptiness of our lives. You find on O'Donohue something which should be "normal" in the extraordinary way that he describes and talks about beauty and love and life. What is so striking about his work, and I think this is what moves you and draws you to his books and podcasts, is that he is able to identify and describe beauty and love in so many ways, in places that we've forgotten to look for it, that beauty is the driving force of life. But he also manages to talk about beauty in an incredibly beautiful way. Its as if his words are filled by this beauty, shaped and formed and become, in themselves, an expression of beauty. He manages to point to the emptiness of our contemporary lives, not with the blunt, angry, harsh cynicism that I so often find myself burdened with, but with a gentle observation that our lives remain deeply connected to the divine and the beauty. That our lives, rather than defined by dull emptiness, are filled with beauty if, perhaps, we are able to open ourselves to it.

...to be continued.
