Two weeks in Rome and I’m fully immersed in the habit of starting to drink wine at midday—even if it’s bad and overpriced and served by a waiter who really (!)  says “Ciao Bella”. Also, this airport lounge is the only place where you’re allowed to remove your face mask to get hammered in style. Some hours ago, we both packed our bags, simultaneously, yet 15.000 kilometers and ten time zones apart, me to go back to Berlin and straight into self-isolation, you to leave your quarantine hotel—the one you entered as “biological hazard” and that you now exit as orderly citizen, officially free from covid, free from wearing masks, free from restrictions but locked up in a country (a big one, for sure) and therefore trapped in another illusion of freedom.

*Freedom.* In your last post, out of many beautiful, wise and painful observations, one thought stood out for me: the desire of humans ”to become bigger, richer, more powerful such that no one can finally put a limit on us and therefore we are free.”

There is, at least to me, a tenderness in these words, one that you may not have had in mind when writing a text about serving the wrong masters and dismissing our insignificance in the cosmos, immature creatures that we are. But that still shines through. 

Free from what, I wonder? Free to do and not do whatever we want? Astoundingly enough we function very well within the (social) boundaries in order to ultimately overcome them (which of course, spoiler alert, we never will). Free from financial pressures? From the law? Taxes? Housecleaning? From other people’s judgements? Free from all the masters that we, as you’ve so beautifully described, will never get rid of unless we master ourselves? Free from death? Luckily, we’re not there… yet.

So I claim—and none of this is really new—that we also strive to be free from that itching psychic wound that never had the chance to heal, and that essentially forms and feeds this thing we call “ego”. 

In your post, you ask yourself why you remain fearful despite finding ways of acceptance and self-knowledge, why you have the need to distract yourself in order to numb the pain. Why, despite greater knowledge, is it so hard to escape the same old patterns—and to *actually* push the boundaries and be free?

Aren’t we trying to climb higher or hurry faster or distract ourselves more in order to outrun the pain and rise above it? In order to reverse an irreversible damage inflicted on us when we were children and still beautifully naïve, or when we were grown-ups and already disillusioned? Aren’t we not only serving the wrong masters, but also our own traumatic injuries, and hence, if untreated, they harden bit by bit, layer by layer, scar tissue over scar tissue? 

When talking about spirituality or mysticism, people say that you can live from the ego and you can live from the soul (or whatever you want to call it, spirit, inner world, Jung’s subconsciousness). This suggests the outward “ego” as the shallow ingredient of one’s personality that must be overcome, as the “egoistic” part that wants to be special and irreplaceable, that is driven by blind ambition and erratic emotions and the desire to be loved at all costs. And the “soul” as the inward place of wholesomeness and mindfulness and awareness (all these beautiful-*nesses* that are lovely but have the smell of virtue-signaling to them). A clean-cut case, isn’t it?

And yet there is, I believe, a deep natural yearning in each and every one of us to be seen by other people, to be minded and sheltered in dark times, to be loved. Is this hunger driven by the soul or driven by the ego, or both, or by something different altogether? Or, to phrase it another way, is there a “good” desire to be loved and a “bad” one, a shallow one and a not so shallow one, or do they ultimately originate from the same place? From a space of innocence, maybe, deep inside us, that once was big and vast, but that shrinks and crumbles with every loss we face and every betrayal we have to withstand and every battle we fight in vain?

Maybe… there’s another way of seeing the ego, a more nuanced one, not (only) in the sense of winning at whatever cost, and wanting it all and now. Not only as that greedy beast? But as our outward force that seeks to protect the innocence within us, that has done so since our childhood, and that has gathered its best weapons, guns and knives and grenades and a gigantic flamethrower. If so… wouldn’t it mean that the ones with the most threatening arms and the deepest crocodile-filled moats have the most to defend?

And if so… isn’t there a chance for *compassion*, as new-agey and misused as that term is (with ourselves, but also with the most ego-driven, hard-wired fellow, with all of us who may or may not worship the wrong gods)? Like most armed forces, ego is raw and fierce and not so well behaved; it’s hungry and it takes over when given too much power. And who could blame it? Doesn’t our society encourage many of these traits and features… all the claps and likes and flawless images? Maybe we should understand that what was initially meant to protect us, may not necessarily have our best interests in mind—and should be put in perspective. 

Like me, meditating on ego in an airport lounge, while being pushed and pulled by that very ego (and additionally thrown off balance by the wine). There is the actual pain of missing you and all the valid emotions and thoughts that derive from being far apart. But there is also—and it’s hard to face once having regained even a minimum of critical distance—my ego wallowing in all kinds of sensations: The fear of not leaving a mark in your life (or not a big enough one). The need to receive validation (yours and the society’s). The difficulty to be patient and trusting (despite having a deep confidence in us). The notion of everything being dull when you are not around and hence making you, solely, responsible for my happiness (which I know, I cannot and need not do). And instead of embracing the opportunity to go on a journey together with a beloved person, to explore unknown territory and have the chance to grow, my ego tries to hold on to the one thing it knows well—the fear of loss, the same old pattern—and looks for someone or something else to “blame”. It cannot, so it seems, stand back for a moment and give up control (even though it never really is *in control*). 

Maybe this is why the ego—desperately, tragically—NEEDS to give us at least the illusion that we have the sovereignty of will; that we are in control when acting upon its behalf and strive for more; that we must hunt bigger game, make bigger impacts, and achieve immortality in the end. To justify its existence, for better or worse. It may not be good for us, it may limit our possibilities or victimize us, or may be utterly destructive. It stresses its grandeur, while it *actually* makes us smaller than we are. So let’s get rid of it ASAP, no?

But then again, aren’t we the sum of our experiences, of our stinking wounds and itching battle scars? If we claim that true love / compassion / self-love / authenticity / spirituality / you-name-it embraces even our most undesirable parts (the “warts and all”)—why doesn’t that apply to our (my) pathetic, self-absorbed, ugly, voracious little ego?

Ego musters a sheer infinite amount of energy to create its narration, a story that has the power to entirely steer a human existence when repeated over and over in their mind. As a storyteller I find that fascinating, because I believe in the potency of words—they create reality, they construct meaning. But I also know that no story ever stays the same. Stories evolve over time; they are reformed depending on where and when and by whom they are told; some parts get lost, new parts are added, some are reinvented. Stories have layers and subtext and never—*never*—one meaning only. So why should there be a so-called “natural default setting” that is fixed and set for ever and ever? Why shouldn’t we be able to reshape our personal narration or discover new layers to it (even if it might take time and a damn lot of patience)? And yes, it is painful to understand that all those years of serving the wrong masters and serving the wrong crooked stories about ourselves may feel like “wasted”, but still they happened for a reason—to bring us here, to this moment where we can head off in a new direction. Ultimately no one but we, ourselves, have the responsibility to not give ego more power than it should have (and hence harden to the extent of mere spiritual death).

There is this quote by Harbhajan Singh Khalsa:

*“When ego is lost, limit is lost. You become infinite, kind and beautiful.”*

It’s lovely, really, and yet I wonder: Can we get rid of ego after all? And should we? Can we nevertheless be infinite, kind, beautiful—and free? Yes, there’s the rabbit hole of *surrender* here, once again, the ultimate promise of liberation on the horizon, where the sky and the ocean touch. But maybe it’s a good start to understand that ego exists for a reason: To be our lifeline in the world and our protection when the going gets rough. To navigate us through our day-to-day struggles. Or to be a motor, something to push against in order to evolve – if we only learn to direct its vast energy and re-tell our own tales.

So maybe the acceptance of ego (and of its “warts and all”) can be empowering, an act of kindness that—maybe—frees us. It allows us to not blindly act upon its behalf, but to tend to it, let it have its say, and then put it in place, with a gentle: “Would you please...!” or a not so gentle: “Shut the fuck up!” (or, if need be, a cheesy “Ciao, Bella!”) And then, well, good luck with that. It’s a fight, so better prepare your flamethrowers... 

By the way: I WANT to believe that we are special (despite personal indications to the contrary): Not in a superficial “ego-sense” (at least I hope), but in the sense that we are wonderfully, painfully complex creatures, mysterious and infinite and beautiful (and so so weird), no matter how deep this beauty might be buried, and how hard, if not impossible, it is to retrieve (and even if I, myself, need to go a long way to truly convince myself of this. But knowing you gives me confidence…).