Tempests and Teacups.
Or: The pros and cons of surviving a storm.

Remember the time we watched “All is lost”, Robert Redford playing an aging sailor in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, fighting – or rather not-fighting – for his life? How we hated his turtle-like slowness, his indifference, how it made us all antsy that he, despite seeing the storm coming, found the time to get a proper shave and patch up his scratches? That he, despite knowing that his boat was going to sink, came back, one time, two time, three times to collect yet another useful item he hadn’t thought of in the first place? For days, we would rummage the internet for reviews, in sheer disbelieve how everyone seemed to love that movie so much (and wondering what we got so terribly wrong), euphorically celebrating every faint voice that agreed with us (most of them fellow sailor who, like us, couldn’t believe all the damn mistakes this dude makes. Anyway...).

Both of us have faced storms, some of them actual gales in the ocean, some of them the storms that life throws at us every now and then; losing people, losing chances, losing faith, and somehow learning to live with it. And then there are other storms, the ones that we create in our heads. Sometimes they are merely a tempest in a teacup, but nevertheless they have the power to send us flying, with panicky hearts and eyes too to blind to see the forest for the trees.

I sit in a hotel room, Eternal City, with rain pouring down hard from a heavy, grey sky; empty Peroni bottles lined up next to the door. You are thousands of kilometers away, locked in another hotel room and treated like biological hazard; Red lines on the floor and daily police calls in order to save humankind, and outside the window the eternal blue sky. 
And not always, but occasionally (whenever I let go of self-possession and open the familiar trap door, just a bit), I wonder how I can maintain that trust, the trust that things will be fine (the 6th wave, as you called it), flat breath and flat gaze, and the absolute certainty that just now, in that very moment, you must have realized that this, us, you and me, has been an illusion. I feel foolish just admitting to this, foolish to create yet another scene on screen, childish (where has that child-like innocence gone and when did I lose it, at 26 or 34 or earlier or later?). Sanity is telling me otherwise, but insane I am, obviously, knocked-over teacups and burnt fingers and blindness for Rome’s beauty. It doesn’t matter what storms I survived before; it doesn’t help to know that I can and will. Or is it, maybe, that these storms made us realize even more how fragile the world is, things are, we are? 

And then again: Do I wish for more indifference? More Robert Redford? More dead calm to shield myself, against the unknown and the potential pain and the fear of “All is lost”, one two three four five…. SIX…one two three four five… SIX?

Long before we watched that movie, before the existential storm became our favorite metaphor, long before we met, I wrote the following. It was the beginning of a novel that got torn apart in one of those tempests but that has now, strangely, been swirled back to me.  

“The worst thing is not the storm. That’s what the drowned say. 

He’s the enemy one must battle. You nail up windows and pile up sandbags. You hoard and prep. You clear your house or bunker down. You cower under tables or hide away in alcoves, not quite able to understand the sheer magnitude. In sum: The fragile human is fighting a giant, one who seeks to squash him, with names barely adequate to describe its power, hurricane, typhoon, tempest; a giant who tears apart sails and shatters glass and throws cars upon houses; who turns waves into mountains and the trough through into an abyss, while, in real time, the images of the destruction achieve iconic status, Hashtag #climatechange, see how we’re being punished, see how nature is getting back at us! 

Yet, no matter where or when you find yourself in the midst of this battle, this unfair showdown, David versus Goliath (with no chance of David winning, this time): what keeps us going, despite the odds, is an enormous will to survive, always. Maybe you will lose that fight, but never without fighting. Never without struggling and kicking and screaming, without resisting. Never without clinging to a tree or the mast of your boat, just with the tips of your fingers and with all remaining strength, clinging on for dear life. 

How nice is, on the contrary, the lull, isn’t it? The sweet absence of gusts and squalls, the air all tranquil and peaceful; days to drink cocktails with little umbrellas and get a tan, with the sun glittering on a soft silky sea. Nothing bad will happen, except, maybe, to start drifting towards the banks or the cliffs, slowly but surely, but not today or tomorrow, only in a few days or weeks from now. Like the seafarers in the dead calm, back in the days, who could do nothing but wait, patiently or impatiently, while running out of stock and water (and booze), and while in the absolute absence of sense – didn’t they, when sailing off, have a goal in mind, to fight some war or find some paradise or forward some goods, slaves, salt, sardines? – being seized with ennui first, and later with lethargy; the card games stop and then the singing; next there’s a growing tenseness, a petulance, but one still strides up and down and maybe starts a little fist fight, just because. Then melancholia, coating everything like with sugar icing, too sweet and too sticky, and, at last, idiocy. Everything gets weak and limp, no movement, nowhere, a fainthearted and utterly stupid death, only occasionally there’s a bird fluttering by or a mirage, or a butterfly who starts to lick off the sweat from your blank face; and there’s nothing worth fighting for anymore, or fighting against, while the earth has stopped breathing, indefinitely.” 
